We’re experiencing slow UI updates due to the new Row Level Security (RLS) policies in our database. For example, after adding or deleting an expense, it takes a few seconds before changes appear in the expense list, activity log, or user balances. Users expect the interface to feel instant and reliable.

Here’s what we need you to do:

1. Implement “Optimistic UI” Updates
When a user adds or deletes an expense, immediately update the frontend state as if the operation succeeded—don’t wait for the API/database response.
Show the new expense or remove the deleted one right away in the UI.
If the backend responds with an error, roll back the UI to the previous state and show an error message or notification.
Example pattern (pseudocode):

// When user adds an expense:
1. Immediately update the expense list and UI state (show the new expense).
2. Make the API call to add the expense to the backend.
3. If API fails, revert the UI change and notify the user.
Same for deletes/edits.

2. Chain Local UI Updates for Related Data
When an expense is added or removed, immediately update related UI elements:
Add a new activity log entry (locally).
Update user balances (locally).
Sync these local updates with the backend response when it arrives.
3. Show Progress and Certainty
Show a loading spinner or subtle animation while syncing with the backend, so users know something is happening.
Optionally, show a temporary “saving…” or “syncing…” indicator next to new/updated/deleted items.
On success: remove the indicator.
On error: roll back and display an error notification.
4. Batch or Debounce Expensive API Calls
If you’re updating several parts of the UI (expenses, activity, balances) from one user action, batch the backend updates or queries to avoid overloading the database.
Use debounce or throttle for expensive recalculations.
5. Review and Optimize Database Queries
Review the SQL generated by Supabase/Postgres for expense, activity, and balance updates. Optimize any N+1 queries or missing indexes.
Ensure that RLS policies do not introduce unnecessary subqueries that slow down data access.
6. Example Implementation Tasks
Refactor the expense add/delete UI to use optimistic updates.
Ensure activity log and user balances are updated immediately in the UI, then reconciled with backend results.
Add error handling to gracefully revert UI if an API call fails.
Audit and optimize backend queries and indexes.
Goal:
The app should feel “instant” to users—UI changes appear right away, while backend work happens in the background, and any sync problems are gracefully handled.

